Add Standalone Activities Python tutorial (#474)
temporalio/temporal-learning: docs/tutorials/python/standalone-activities/index.md

---
id: standalone-activities-python
title: Build a Job Queue with Standalone Activities
sidebar_position: 1
description: Build a durable webhook delivery service in Python using Temporal's Standalone Activities, Temporal's durable job queue, then run it hands-on in an Instruqt lab.
keywords: [Python, temporal, sdk, tutorial, standalone activities, job queue]
tags:
- Python
image: /img/temporal-logo-twitter-card.png
last_update:
  date: 2026-06-15
---

import Link from '@docusaurus/Link';

<img className="banner" src="/img/banners/standalone-activities-banner.png" alt="Build a Job Queue with Standalone Activities in Python" />

### Introduction

_By [Nikolay Advolodkin](https://www.linkedin.com/in/nikolayadvolodkin/), Staff Developer Advocate at Temporal_

You're going to build a durable webhook delivery service.

> When something happens in your application, such as a payment clearing, an order shipping, or a user signing up, you POST to a URL another team gave you. Doing it durably means: if the network fails, retry. If the receiver returns 500, retry. If your service crashes mid-send, the retry does not double-deliver.

Reviewer: I found the wording on this paragraph a bit awkward. Had to read it a few times before I made sense of it.

Specifically, I got thrown by the "if the network fails, retry." At first I thought that should have been "retries" and then there would be more of a list of items. But then the period threw me and I had to go back and reread it.

Author: Good call. Reworked into a single parallel sentence so it no longer reads as clipped fragments: "Doing it durably means three things: retry if the network fails, retry if the receiver returns a 500, and never double-deliver if your service crashes mid-send." (6d88261)

The same `deliver_webhook` Activity runs through every module of this tutorial:

- **Module 1**: Run the Activity directly from a client. Inspect it in the Temporal UI.
- **Module 2**: Make retries safe with an idempotency key.
- **Module 3**: Reject duplicate jobs at the platform level.
- **Module 4**: Cap throughput and prioritize urgent jobs.
- **Module 5**: Long-running jobs that heartbeat progress and resume after a crash.
- **Module 6**: The same Activity, called from a Workflow. Same code, two job types.

> **Standalone Activities are Temporal's durable job queue.** You write a regular `@activity.defn` and submit it with one API call. Temporal persists it, retries it on failure, and makes it visible in the UI, with no broker, scheduler, or result store for you to operate.

Reviewer: > **Standalone Activities are Temporal's durable job queue.**

This doesn't seem quite right in my head, for a couple of reasons.

1. Is it fair to say that a standalone activity is the durable job queue? It feels like the actual "queue" in temporal is something else. The activity is the thing that gets executed when the time comes in that queue, but it's not the queue itself.
2. Temporal has multiple durable elements including Workflows, Activities, and Standalone Activities. The statement above seems to imply that Standalone Activities are the only element.

Author: "Is it fair to say that a standalone activity is the durable job queue"
- yes, this is the exact language that Product wants us to use as requested by Phil (https://docs.temporal.io/standalone-activity)

Author: @WadeWaldron do you have a recommendation for the wording change you'd like to see for "Temporal has multiple durable elements including Workflows, Activities, and Standalone Activities. The statement above seems to imply that Standalone Activities are the only element."?
Feel free to use the recommend changes feature.

Reviewer: Well, I'm not here to argue with product. If this is what they are telling us, then I guess we go with it.

### What you'll learn

By the end you'll be able to:

- Submit an Activity as a durable, addressable job with `client.execute_activity` / `client.start_activity`.
- Make retries safe with an idempotency key so a crash can't double-deliver.
- Reject duplicate submissions at the server with `ActivityIDConflictPolicy.USE_EXISTING`.
- Cap dispatch rate with `max_activities_per_second` and prioritize urgent work.
- Heartbeat a long-running Activity and resume it from the last checkpoint after a crash.
- Reuse the exact same Activity as a step inside a Workflow, with no rewrite.

### Prerequisites

- Comfortable reading and writing Python (functions, classes, imports).
- Familiar with Temporal Activities and Workers at the level [Temporal 101 in Python](https://learn.temporal.io/courses/temporal_101/python/) covers. If those words are new, take that course first and come back.

## Run the lab in your browser (recommended)

> This tutorial is built as a hands-on Instruqt lab. Nothing to install: the Temporal Service, the Web UI, and a webhook receiver all boot with the sandbox, so you start writing code immediately. The modules below are the concept walkthrough; do the actual building in the lab.

Reviewer: > The modules below are the concept walkthrough; do the actual building in the lab.

This isn't quite right, since below we actually suggest that doing it locally is an option. So it's more like "we recommend that you do the actual building in the lab, but we've provided instructions on how to run it locally if you prefer."

Author: Fixed. Now reads "we recommend doing the actual building in the lab, but you can also run the code locally if you prefer," with an inline link to the local-setup section. (691ae60)

Sign up to launch the lab:

<iframe
    width="804"
    height="472"
    sandbox="allow-forms allow-modals allow-popups allow-same-origin allow-scripts allow-popups-to-escape-sandbox"
    src="https://play.instruqt.com/embed/temporal/invite/tkjhxj0w55uz"
    style={{border: 0, maxWidth: '100%'}}
    allowFullScreen
></iframe>

> ## Run the code locally (optional)

Reviewer: Does this mean that we'll have almost identical instructions on a webpage and in Instruqt?

Is that going to create potential issues with drift between the two as one gets updated and the other gets neglected?

Author: Almost identical no. I would say that the webpage contains 20% of the information that is contained in the lab.

Yes, it will potentially create drift. What are your thoughts on this @WadeWaldron ?

Reviewer: I'd love a way to avoid the drift. But given that it's not identical, that makes it difficult to offer an immediate suggestion.

Prefer to run it yourself? Clone the course repo and start the pieces the sandbox normally boots for you:

> ```bash

Reviewer: Should we include any prereqs for running the lab locally?

Looks like they probably need to install uv, temporal, Python, obviously. Anything else?

Author: Added a prerequisites list to the run-locally section: Git, Python 3.11+, uv, and a recent Temporal CLI (so the Standalone Activities features are available). (1358570)

git clone https://github.com/temporalio/edu-standalone-activities.git
cd edu-standalone-activities/python/course-repo
uv sync
```

Then, in separate terminals:

```bash
# Webhook receiver (records what your Worker delivers)
uv run python server/webhook_receiver.py

# Temporal dev server + Web UI on http://localhost:8233
temporal server start-dev --ui-port 8233

# A module's Worker
cd exercise/01-durable-job-queue
uv run python -m webhooks.worker

# Submit a job (in another terminal, from the same module folder)
uv run python -m webhooks.send_standalone evt_001
curl http://localhost:9000/_received
```

Each module has parallel `exercise/<NN>` (starter code with `TODO` markers) and `solution/<NN>` folders. If you get stuck, diff your work against the matching `solution/` folder.

:::caution Running locally is unsupported

You may hit environment setup issues (Python version, dependencies, port conflicts, Temporal CLI installation) that we can't control or support. The Instruqt lab is the supported path. Use localhost only if you're comfortable troubleshooting your own setup.

:::

## Module 1: Submit a durable job with one API call

> Most job queues make you operate the hard parts yourself: a broker, a result store, a scheduler, retry logic re-implemented per service, and a Tier-0 system nobody wants to own. A Standalone Activity is just a regular `@activity.defn` you submit with one call:

Reviewer: This is misleading.

Temporal doesn't eliminate your result store. You still need to store the results of your activity somewhere, and that's not Temporal.

Meanwhile, Temporal has just become the broker, essentially. So it didn't eliminate it. It just replaced it.

It also doesn't eliminate any Tier-0 requirements. It potentially shifts them. So Temporal becomes your Tier-0 system, but someone is still managing Temporal. Temporal Cloud can potentially simplify that, but that's not the claim here. And at the same time, if these Activities are truly mission critical, you may still want to treat them as Tier-0 in case they get stuck in Temporal, start taking too long, start repeatedly failing, etc.

So Temporal definitely simplifies some things. It simplifies scheduling and retry logic. And it does unify all of that logic into a single platform. But suggesting that a Standalone Activity replaces all of this complexity with a single call isn't quite right.

Author: Agreed, this was overclaiming. Reframed to "consolidates" rather than "eliminates," dropped the result-store and "nobody wants to own" lines, and added a clause clarifying what Temporal does not take over (your app's own data store; someone still operates Temporal, your team or Temporal Cloud). (a4bcd15)

> ```py

Reviewer: Should this be wrapped in a named function (presumably `deliver_webhook`) so that it ties into the next block of code?

Reviewer: Also, is an annotation needed?

Author: Done. The snippet is now the full `@activity.defn def deliver_webhook(req: WebhookDelivery) -> int:` function, so it ties to the deliver_webhook referenced in the next block. (8edcf02)

Author: Yes, added the `@activity.defn` annotation as part of showing the full function. (8edcf02)

await client.start_activity(
    deliver_webhook,
    ...,
    id_conflict_policy=ActivityIDConflictPolicy.USE_EXISTING,
)
```

Both calls now succeed with the **same `run_id`**, and the duplicate never reaches a Worker. This is scheduling-layer dedup; it composes with the receiver-side idempotency key from Module 2.

<iframe src="https://raw.githack.com/temporalio/edu-standalone-activities/main/docs/conflict-policy-demo/index.html" width="100%" height="520" frameBorder="0" style={{border: 0, borderRadius: '8px'}}></iframe>

> **Check your understanding:** with `USE_EXISTING` set, you call `start_activity(id="evt_001")` twice, but the second call arrives 60 seconds *after* the first one already completed. What happens?

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>

A **new** execution starts. `id_conflict_policy` only governs duplicates while the original is *in flight*. Once it completes, `id_reuse_policy` takes over, and its default (`ALLOW_DUPLICATE`) accepts a fresh run. For dedup across both windows, also set `id_reuse_policy=ActivityIDReusePolicy.REJECT_DUPLICATE`.

</details>

## Module 4: Cap throughput and prioritize urgent jobs

> By default the Worker dispatches Activities as fast as it can pull them, which is often faster than the downstream service allows. Fan out 60 deliveries at a rate-limited receiver and you get a flood of 429s and climbing retry counts:

Reviewer: This isn't quite right (at least based on my limited understanding).

The worker isn't dispatching the activities. The activities are dispatched by the work queue.

The worker then receives those dispatches and executes the activities. And while it will execute them as fast as it can pull them, the speed it pulls will be dependent on the latency of the execution. So if the thing it's executing is slow, the worker will be slow.

My suggestion:

```suggestion
By default the Worker executes Activities as fast as it can process them, which may be faster than the downstream service allows. If the receiver is rate-limited, you will get a flood of "Too Many Requests" errors and climbing retry counts:
```

Author: Agreed, and you're right that dispatch is the Task Queue's job, not the Worker's. Updated to "the Worker executes Activities as fast as it can process them..." (7976b32)

![A rate-limited Standalone Activity in the Temporal UI: status Running, attempt count climbing, last failure HTTP 429](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/temporalio/edu-standalone-activities/main/python/diagrams/rate-limited-activity-running.png)

> Retrying harder can't solve a whole-fleet throughput problem; you have to pace the *dispatch*. One keyword on the Worker does it:

Reviewer: What is a "whole-fleet throughput problem"? We haven't talked about it so far and here it's introduced with the assumption that we know what it is.

Author: Fixed. Replaced the "whole-fleet throughput problem" jargon with a plain explanation: the bottleneck is the combined request rate of every delivery against a receiver that allows only so many per second, and per-Activity retries can't fix a total-rate problem (every retry just piles more load on). (c152fb7)

```py

> max_activities_per_second=2.0,

Reviewer: Where does this go?

Author: Clarified. `max_activities_per_second` now appears inside the `Worker(...)` constructor, so it's clear where it goes. (8edcf02)

```

Excess work waits in the Task Queue on the server, dispatched at the configured rate. Nothing is dropped. The companion control is `Priority(priority_key, fairness_key, fairness_weight)`: a lower `priority_key` jumps urgent work ahead of a backlog, and the fairness fields stop one busy tenant from starving the rest. See [Task Queue Priority and Fairness](https://docs.temporal.io/develop/task-queue-priority-fairness).

<iframe src="https://raw.githack.com/temporalio/edu-standalone-activities/main/docs/rate-limit-priority-demo/index.html" width="100%" height="430" frameBorder="0" style={{border: 0, borderRadius: '8px'}}></iframe>

> **Check your understanding:** your downstream API allows 100 req/sec. You set `max_activities_per_second=10` on one Worker. Are you safe?

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>

> Safe but probably underutilizing, only 10% of the headroom. `max_activities_per_second` is *per Worker*, so N Workers aggregate to N × the cap. For a hard, queue-wide cap regardless of Worker count, use `max_task_queue_activities_per_second`.

Reviewer: This is a bit confusing.

The first sentence seems to suggest that we're safe, but that there is plenty of room to grow.

Meanwhile the second sentence points out that it's *per worker*. So if you have 11 workers, then you actually aren't safe.

Author: Tightened. The answer now scopes "safe" to the one-Worker case, then shows how the per-Worker cap breaks as you scale (a second Worker is 20/sec, eleven is 110/sec, past the limit), then points to max_task_queue_activities_per_second for a queue-wide cap. (6d88261)

```py
start_index = 0
if info.heartbeat_details:
    start_index = info.heartbeat_details[0]  # resume from the last checkpoint
```

Pair it with `heartbeat_timeout` so the server detects a dead or stuck attempt in seconds instead of waiting out the full `start_to_close_timeout`. Heartbeating is also how cancellation reaches a running Activity. No side database required.

> **Check your understanding:** your batch Activity has `heartbeat_timeout=5s` and processes one item per second. Mid-batch the Worker *hangs* (a deadlock, not a crash) and stops heartbeating. What does Temporal do?

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>

After 5 seconds with no heartbeat, Temporal treats the attempt as dead, the same as a crash, and schedules a retry on whatever Worker picks it up next. That's the point of `heartbeat_timeout`: a liveness signal that lets the server route around a stuck Worker quickly, rather than waiting for the much longer `start_to_close_timeout`.

</details>

## Module 6: Same code runs anywhere

> Traditional job queues paint you into a corner: the queue runs jobs, orchestration lives elsewhere, and code gets rewritten when a job becomes multi-step. With Temporal, the exact same Activity runs both ways. Submit `deliver_webhook` directly *or* call it as a step inside a Workflow:

Reviewer: I'm not convinced this is true. I don't see why proper code separation couldn't allow me to do the same thing with a traditional queue.

Author: Fair point. Reworded so it no longer implies you can't reuse code elsewhere: with a traditional queue you could share the function too, but you'd rebuild the durability and coordination around it (which step ran, what to retry, how to resume after a crash) in a separate orchestrator; with Temporal those guarantees come with the Activity into the Workflow unchanged. (ddf3a83)

Reviewer: If I were implementing something in a traditional queue, I would implement it as:

```
function doStuff(params) {
  ...
}
```

Then, I'd have the queue call that function when appropriate.

Whether it's a multi-step job or a single step job, I'd re-use the exact same code as-is. The only difference is how it gets wired into the queue. That feels like largely the same difference we experience when using Temporal.

So I'm just not convinced that we've painted ourselves into a corner, or that Temporal gets us out of that corner.

Author: solid feedback. I updated the copy to reflect your point.
